If you've been monitoring
the latest news on
self-driving cars,
you would have heard
the phrase convolutional
neural networks
or ConvNets for
short at least a few times.
In fact, we currently use
ConvNets to perform
a multitude of
perception tasks on
our own self-driving car
the autonomoose.
In this lesson, we will
take a deeper look at
these fascinating
architectures to
understand their importance
for visual perception.
Specifically, you will learn how
convolutional layers
use cross-correlation
instead of general
matrix multiplication
to tailor neural networks
for image input data.
We'll also cover
the advantages these models
incur over standard
feed-forward neural networks.
Convolutional neural networks
are a specialized kind of
neural network for
processing data
that has a known
grid-like topology.
Examples of such data can be
1D time-series data sampled
at regular intervals,
2D images or even 3D videos.
ConvNets are mainly comprised
of two types of layers;
convolutional layers
and pooling layers.
A simple example of a convNet
architecture is VGG 16.
This network takes
in the image and
passes it through a set
of convolutional layers,
a pooling layer,
and another couple of
convolutional layers,
and then more pooling layers and
convolutional layers and so on.
Don't worry too much
about the specifics of
the VGG 16 architecture
design for now,
we will discuss
this architecture in
detail in a later video
when we learn about
object detection.
Let's see how these two types
of layers work in practice.
The neural network, hidden
layers we have described so
far are usually called
fully connected layers.
As their name suggests,
fully connected layers connect
each node output to every
node input in the next layer.
That means that
every element of the input
contributes to every element
of the output.
This is implemented in software
through dense matrix
multiplication.
Although counter-intuitive,
convolutional layers use
cross-correlation
not convolutions for
their linear operator instead
of general matrix multiplication.
The logic behind using
cross-correlation is that if
the parameters are learned,
it does not matter if we
flip the output or not.
Since we are learning the weights
of the convolutional layer,
the flipping does not
affect our results at all.
This results in what we
call sparse connectivity.
Each input element to
the convolutional layer only
affects a few output elements,
thanks to the use of
a limited size kernel for
the convolutional operation.
Let's begin by describing how
convolutional layers
work in practice.
We'll assume that
we want to apply
a convolutional layer
to an input image.
We will refer to this image
as our input volume,
as we will see
convolutional layers taking
output of other layers
as their inputs as well.
The width of our input volume
is its horizontal dimension,
the height is
its vertical dimension,
and the depth is
the number of channels.
In our case, all
three characteristics
have a value of three.
But why didn't we consider
the gray pixels in our
height or width computation?
The gray pixels are added to
the image through
a process called padding.
The number of pixels
added on each side is
called the padding
size in this case one.
Padding is essential
for retaining
the shape required to
perform the convolutions.
We perform the convolution
operations through
a set of kernels or filters.
Each Filter is
comprised of a set of
weights and a single bias.
The number of channels
of the kernel needs to
correspond to the number of
channels of the input volume.
In this case, we have
three weight channels per
filter corresponding to red,
green, and blue channels
of the input image.
Usually we have multiple filters
per convolutional layer.
Let's see how to
apply our two filters
to get an output volume
from our input volume.
We start by taking each channel
of the filter and perform
cross-correlation
between that channel
and its corresponding channel
in the input volume.
We then proceed to add
the output of
the cross-correlation of
all channels with the bias
of the filter to arrive at
the final output value.
Notice that we get
one output channel per filter.
We will get back to
this point in a bit.
Let's now see how to get
the rest of the output volume.
After we're done with
the first computation,
we shift the filter location by
a preset number of
pixels horizontally.
When we reach the end of
the input volume width,
we shift the filter location by
a preset number of
pixels vertically.
The vertical and
horizontal shifts
are usually the same value,
and we refer to this value as
the stride of
our convolutional layer.
We arrive to a final output
volume with its own width,
depth, and height values.
Assuming that
the filters are M by M,
and we have K filters,
a stride of S,
a padding P, we can derive
expressions for the width,
height, and depth of
our output volume.
You would think this gets
challenging to keep track of,
but when designing ConvNets,
it is very important to know
what size output layers
you'll end up with.
As an example, you don't want to
reduce the size of
your output volume too much
if you are trying to
detect small traffic signs
and traffic lights
on road scenes.
They only occupy a small number
of pixels in the image,
and their visibility
might get lost if
the output volume is too compact.
Let us now continue to describe
the second building block of
ConvNets, pooling layers.
A pooling layer uses pooling
functions to replace
the output of
the previous layer with
a summary statistic of
the nearby outputs.
Pooling helps make
the representations
become invariant to
small translations of the input.
If we translate the input
a small amount,
the output of the pooling layer
will not change.
This is important for
object recognition for example,
as if we shift a car a small
amount in an image space,
it should still be
recognizable as a car.
Let us take an example of
the most commonly used
pooling layer, Max pooling.
Max pooling summarizes
output volume patches
with the max function.
Given the input volume in gray,
Max Pooling applies the max
function to an M by M region,
then shifts this region in
strides similar to the
convolutional layer.
Once again we can derive
expressions for the output width,
height, and depth of
the pooling layers according
to the following equations.
In our previous example,
the filter size M is two,
and we get a stride of two,
so we end up with
a two-by-two output.
Let's see how this
pooling layer can help
us with translation invariance.
As an example, let's shift
the previous input volume
by one pixel.
The added pixels due to
the shift are shown in blue,
whereas the removed pixels
are shown in red.
We can go ahead and apply
Max Pooling to this input volume,
as we did in the previous slide.
When comparing our new output to
the original volume output,
we find that only one
element has changed.
So far, we've discussed how
ConvNets operate
but still did not
provide a reason for
their usefulness in the context
of self-driving cars.
There are really
two important reasons
for the effectiveness
of ConvNets.
First, they usually have
far fewer parameters in
their convolutional layers than
a similar network with
fully connected layers.
This reduces the chance of
over-fitting through
parameters sharing,
and allows ConvNets to
operate on larger images.
Perhaps more importantly,
is translation invariance.
By using the same parameters to
process every block of the image,
ConvNets are capable of
detecting an object
or classifying
a pixel even if it is
shifted with a translation
on the image plane.
This means we can detect
cars wherever they appear.
Before we end this lesson,
I would like to shed light on
the history of convolutional
neural networks.
Convolutional neural
networks have played
an important role in
the history of deep learning.
As a matter of
fact, ConvNets were
one of the first
neural network models
to perform well at a time where
other feed-forward
architectures failed,
particularly on
image classification tasks
related to the ImageNet dataset.
In many ways, ConvNets carry
the torch for the rest
of deep learning,
and pave the way to
the relatively new acceptance
of neural networks in general.
Finally, convolutional
networks were some of
the first neural networks to
solve important
commercial applications,
the most famous being
Yann LeCun's handwritten
digit recognizer
in the early nineties,
and remain at the forefront of
commercial applications
of deep learning today.
In fact, in the next week
of this course,
we will show you how
to use ConvNets to
detect a range of different
objects in roads scenes,
2D object detection.
We'll see you then.